=========================
   PyMOTW: EasyDialogs
=========================
:Module: EasyDialogs
:Purpose: Provides simple interfaces to Carbon dialogs from Python.
:Python Version: At least 2.0, Macintosh-only (see References below for a Windows implementation)
:Abstract:

    Use EasyDialogs to include Mac OS-native dialogs in your Python scripts.

Description
===========

The EasyDialogs module includes classes and functions for working with simple
message and prompt dialogs, as well as stock dialogs for querying the user for
file or directory names. The dialogs use the Carbon API. See Apple's
Navigation Services Reference for more details about some of the options not
covered in detail here.

Messages
========

A simple Message function displays modal dialog containing a text message for
the user.

::

    import EasyDialogs

    EasyDialogs.Message('This is a Message dialog')

It is easy to change the label of the "OK" button using the ok argument.

::

    import EasyDialogs

    EasyDialogs.Message('The button label has changed', ok='Continue')

ProgressBar
===========

The ProgressBar class manages a modeless dialog with a progress meter. It can
operate in determinate (when you know how much work there is to be done) or
indeterminate (when you want to show that your app is working, but do not know
how much work needs to be done) modes. The constructor takes arguments for the
dialog title, the maximum value, and a label to describe the current phase of
operation.

In determinate mode, set the maxval argument to the number of steps, amount of
data to download, etc. Then use the incr() method to step the progress from 0
to maxval.

::

    import EasyDialogs
    import time

    meter = EasyDialogs.ProgressBar('Making progress...',
                                    maxval=10,
                                    label='Starting',
                                    )
    for i in xrange(1, 11):
        phase = 'Phase %d' % i
        print phase
        meter.label(phase)
        meter.inc()
        time.sleep(1)
    print 'Done with loop'
    time.sleep(1)

    del meter
    print 'The dialog should be gone now'

    time.sleep(1)

::

    $ python EasyDialogs_ProgressBar.py 
    Phase 1
    Phase 2
    Phase 3
    Phase 4
    Phase 5
    Phase 6
    Phase 7
    Phase 8
    Phase 9
    Phase 10
    Done with loop
    The dialog should be gone now


Explicitly deleting the ProgressBar instance using del removes it from the
screen.

If you are measuring progress in uneven steps, you can use set() to change the
progress meter instead of incr().

::

    import EasyDialogs
    import time

    meter = EasyDialogs.ProgressBar('Making progress...',
                                    maxval=1000,
                                    label='Starting',
                                    )
    for i in xrange(1, 1001, 123):
        msg = 'Bytes: %d' % i
        meter.label(msg)
        meter.set(i)
        time.sleep(1)


Simple Prompts
==============

EasyDialogs also lets you ask the user for information. Use AskString to
display a modal dialog to prompt the user for a simple string.

::

    import EasyDialogs

    response = EasyDialogs.AskString('What is your favorite color?', default='blue')
    print 'RESPONSE:', response


The return value depends on the user's response. It is either the text they
enter:

::

    $ python EasyDialogs_AskString.py
    RESPONSE: blue

or None if they press the Cancel button.

::

    $ python EasyDialogs_AskString.py
    RESPONSE: None


The string response has a length limit of 254 characters. If the value entered
is longer than that, it is truncated.

::

    import EasyDialogs
    import string

    default = string.ascii_letters * 10
    print 'len(default)=', len(default)
    response = EasyDialogs.AskString('Enter a long string', default=default)
    print 'len(response)=', len(response)

::

    $ python EasyDialogs_AskString_too_long.py
    len(default)= 520
    len(response)= 254


Passwords
=========

Use AskPassword to prompt the user for secret values that should not be echoed
back to the screen in clear-text.

::

    import EasyDialogs

    response = EasyDialogs.AskPassword('Password:', default='s3cr3t')
    print 'Shh!:', response

::

    $ python EasyDialogs_AskPassword.py
    Shh!: s3cr3t

The Ok/Cancel behavior for AskPassword is the same as AskString.

Files and Directories
=====================

There are special functions for requesting file or directory names. These use
the native file selector dialogs, so the user does not have to type in the
paths. For example, to ask the user which file to open, use AskFileForOpen.

::

    import EasyDialogs
    import os

    filename = EasyDialogs.AskFileForOpen(
        message='Select a Python source file',
        defaultLocation=os.getcwd(),
        wanted=unicode,
        )

    print 'Selected:', filename

The wanted=unicode argument tells AskFileForOpen to return the name of the
file as a unicode string. The other possible return types include ASCII
string, and some Apple data structures for working with file references. 

By specifing defaultLocation, this example initializes the dialog to the
current working directory. The user is still free to navigate around the
filesystem, of course.

Other options to AskFileForOpen let you filter the values displayed, control
the type codes of files visible to the user, and interact with the dialog
through callbacks. Refer to the module documentation and Apple's reference
guide for more details.

::

    $ python EasyDialogs_AskFileForOpen.py
    Selected: /Users/dhellmann/Documents/PyMOTW/in_progress/EasyDialogs/EasyDialogs_AskFileForOpen.py

To prompt the user to provide a new filename when saving a file, use
AskFileForSave. 

::

    import EasyDialogs
    import os

    filename = EasyDialogs.AskFileForSave(
        message='Name the destination',
        defaultLocation=os.getcwd(),
        wanted=unicode,
        )

    print 'Selected:', filename

::

    $ python EasyDialogs_AskFileForSave.py
    Selected: /Users/dhellmann/Documents/PyMOTW/in_progress/EasyDialogs/new_file.py

If you need the user to select a directory, existing or new, use AskFolder.
The dialog includes a button to let them create a new folder.

::

    import EasyDialogs
    import os

    filename = EasyDialogs.AskFolder(
        message='Name the destination',
        defaultLocation=os.getcwd(),
        wanted=unicode,
        )

    print 'Selected:', filename

::

    $ python EasyDialogs_AskFolder.py
    Selected: /Users/dhellmann/Documents/PyMOTW/in_progress/EasyDialogs

GetArgv
=======

An unusually complex dialog, GetArgv lets the user build a command line string
by selecting options from menus. It uses a variation of the getopt syntax to
describe the valid options, and returns a list of strings that can be parsed
by getopt. In my research this week, I found some scripts that use GetArgv if
the user does not specify arguments on the command line.

Let's look at an example that builds a command using the options supported by
the Python interpreter.

::

    import EasyDialogs

    arguments = EasyDialogs.GetArgv([ 
            ('c=', 'program passed in as string (terminates option list)'),
            ('d', 'Debug'),
            ('E', 'Ignore environment variables'),
            ('i', 'Inspect interactively after running'),
            ('m=', 'run library module as a script (terminates option list)'),
            ('O', 'Optimize generated bytecode'),
            ('Q=', 'division options: -Qold (default), -Qwarn, -Qwarnall, -Qnew'),
            ('S', "don't imply 'import site' on initialization"),
            ('t', 'issue warnings about inconsistent tab usage'),
            ('tt', 'issue errors about inconsistent tab usage'),
            ('u', 'unbuffered binary stdout and stderr'),
            ('v', 'verbose (trace import statements)'),
            ('V', 'print the Python version number and exit'),
            ('W=', 'warning control  (arg is action:message:category:module:lineno)'),
            ('x', 'skip first line of source, allowing use of non-Unix forms of #!cmd'),
            ],
            commandlist=[('python', 'Default Interpreter'),
                         ('python2.5', 'Python 2.5'),
                         ('pyhton2.4', 'Python 2.4'),
                         ],
            addoldfile=True,
            addnewfile=False,
            addfolder=False,
            )
    print arguments


The first argument is a list of tuples containing the option specifier and a
text description. The specifier can contain a single letter for simple boolean
switches; a letter followed by colon (":") or equals sign ("=") for single
letter options that take an argument; several letters for long-form switches
("opt" translates to "--opt"); or several letters followed by colon or equal
sign for long options taking an argument. The option description is a string
displayed in the dialog.

The dialog is divided into 4 sections. At the top is the list of options you
specified. The user can select an option from the list. If the option takes an
argument, a text field is displayed so the user can provide a value. The Add
button inserts the selected option into the command line field at the bottom
of the dialog.

The second argument to GetArgv is a list of commands and descriptions. The
user can select a command to be included in the argument list from the menu in
the middle of the dialog.

The arguments addoldfile, addnewfile, and addfolder control the sensitivity of
the buttons in the third section of the dialog. In this example, only the Add
file... button is enabled because the Python interpreter does not take
directories or missing files as arguments.

At the bottom of the dialog is the command line being constructed by the user.
When they press OK, GetArgv returns a list of all of the options that looks
like sys.argv.

::

    $ python EasyDialogs_GetArgv.py
    ['python', '-d', '-v', '/Users/dhellmann/Documents/PyMOTW/in_progress/EasyDialogs/EasyDialogs_GetArgv.py']


